+++
title = "Hiccups"
date = 2024-01-28
categories = ['Health']
+++

This is not exactly the first topic I thought I would write about on what I expect to be an otherwise technology focused blog. But here we are and it was a quick one to write. :joy:

Hiccups. Those annoying little spasms of your diaphragm that, at least for some, are very difficult to get rid of. But not for me.
<!--more-->

A common ice-breaker at team events is to "share something unique about yourself." I guess I can say "I can stop my own hiccups on demand with a 100% success rate - unaided by any silly tricks" You know the ones I'm talking about: drinking water upside down, getting someone to scare you, breathing into a bag, etc. Ridiculous! All of it! Even the advice on some fairly mainstream health blogs share some that are pretty out there.

So how do I do it?

It's nothing profound. I've found that a very specific pattern of controlled breathing clears them right up for me. I can usually stop them after the very first hiccup.

Next time you have them and are having trouble, try the following:

1. If possible, sit down in an upright and erect posture.
2. Exhale completely. And I mean _completely_. When you think you can't squeeze any more air out of your lungs, squeeze that diaphragm even tighter! Basically until you can't move it any further.
3. Hold things there for about 10 seconds.
4. Take the ever so slightest of breath through your nose. Your diaphragm should still feel fully engaged that entire time.
5. Give it one last push to that original maxed out squeeze. Hold it there for another 5-10 seconds.
6. Slowly inhale through the nose for a full, regular breath.
7. Take 2-3 more measured, evenly paced breathes through the nose.

If your diaphragm acts anything like mine, you've just gotten rid of your hiccups. No outside tools or intervention required!

Why does this work? How the hell should I know - I'm not a doctor!

Hiccups are essentially a muscle spasm. Flexing that muscle and keeping it flexed so that it doesn't really have the room to do so involuntarily makes sense that it might help.

I'm not sure when I first discovered this trick. The earliest recollection I have was during my second or third year of college. I was walking between classes and happened upon a girl stopped on the sidewalk trying to hold her breath and quite audibly failing. I could hear her hiccupping. So I walked over to her and described to her what I wrote above. Sure enough - after the 30 seconds or so of practicing what I taught her - her hiccups were gone. She thanked me and we parted ways. I wonder if she's ever used the trick since...

And now you know. Give it a try the next time you get them. If it works, spread the word!

_PS: This only works if you're sober. Sorry - I haven't figured out how to get rid of beer induced hiccups._ :beer: